https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/10/15/excitement-as-two-new-pandas-arrive-in-us-from-china


Skip links
Skip to Content
Navigation menu
News
Show more news sections
Middle East
Explained
Opinion
Sport
Video
More
Show more sections
Live
Click here to search
Sign upEnrich your Al Jazeera experience by signing in or creating an account.
Navigation menu
Trending
Where is the Madleen Gaza Flotilla?
Russia-Ukraine war
War on Gaza
Donald Trump
News
|
Wildlife
Excitement as two new pandas arrive in US from China
The bears, part of China’s ‘panda diplomacy’, will stay in DC’s National Zoo under a 10-year agreement.

A cargo jet operated by FedEx transporting two giant pandas, lands at Dulles airport in Virginia on October 15, 2024. - Bao Li, a male panda, and female Qing Bao, both three years old, were headed to the Smithsonian National Zoo in Washington on Tuesday under a decade-long breeding and research agreement. (Photo by Brendan SMIALOWSKI / AFP)
A cargo jet transporting two giant pandas from China lands on October 15 at Dulles International Airport in Dulles, Virginia, the United States [Brendan Smialowski/AFP]
Published On 15 Oct 2024
15 Oct 2024
China has sent two giant panda bears to the United States to be housed in Washington, DC’s Smithsonian National Zoo, in a rare diplomatic overture between the two countries.

The three-year-old pandas – a male named Bao Li and a female named Qing Bao – arrived at Virginia’s Dulles International Airport, which serves the US capital, on Tuesday.

Recommended Stories
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Taiwan reports surrounded by 153 Chinese military aircraft during drills
list 2 of 3
Canada, India expel diplomats as police uncover ‘campaign of violence’
list 3 of 3
Blinken condemns China’s ‘dangerous and unlawful’ moves in South China Sea
end of list
They are among a small handful of the black-and-white bears still in the US, which sent most of the highly sought animals back to their native China in recent years under pre-arranged contracts. That includes the return last November of the only three pandas living in Washington’s National Zoo.

Many viewed the absence of a quick replacement for the three pandas as reflective of growing US-China friction, but Chinese President Xi Jinping soon promised he would send new pandas as “envoys of friendship”.

In August, the San Diego Zoo welcomed two new giant pandas, the first to arrive in the US in 21 years.

‘Iconic part of DC’
Anticipation over the arrival of the two new pandas in Washington, DC, has been high, with the zoo’s website featuring a banner that reads: “The pandas are coming”.

Advertisement
“The giant pandas are an iconic part of the Washington, DC story, both for locals and incoming travellers alike,” said Elliott L Ferguson, II, president and CEO of Destination DC. “The interest and excitement associated with their return directly benefits the entire city, bringing further interest and visitors to our hotels, restaurants and other attractions.”

Visitors look at souvenirs after China's ambassador to the United States Xie Feng spoke to the media as he and staff members from The National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute (NZCBI) announced that China will send two young giant pandas to the United States, during an update on the future of the giant panda conservation program at Smithsonian’s National Zoo in Washington, U.S., May 29, 2024. REUTERS/Ken Cedeno
Visitors to the National Zoo have been excited about the arrival of the two new pandas [Ken Cedeno/Reuters]
The National Zoo has been renovating its panda habitat ahead of the new bears’ arrival, setting up new shallow pools and bamboo stands.

The pandas will not be available to the public for more than a month as they quarantine and acclimate to their new habitat.

‘Panda diplomacy’
China has been using so-called “panda diplomacy” since 1972, when the first animals were sent to Washington as a gift, following US President Richard Nixon’s historic visit to China.

Sign up for Al Jazeera
Americas Coverage Newsletter
US politics, Canada’s multiculturalism, South America’s geopolitical rise—we bring you the stories that matter.
E-mail address
Subscribe
By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy
protected by reCAPTCHA
Later, a rolling series of 10-year cooperation agreements was struck, which Chinese Embassy spokesperson Liu Pengyu credited with advancing research in panda preservation.

“The current round of cooperation will focus on prevention and treatment of major diseases, and protection of habitats and wild giant panda populations,” Liu told the Associated Press via email. “We hope the arrival of the pandas will inject fresh impetus into exchanges between China and the US, and help to stabilise the broader bilateral relationship as well.”

As of 2014, there were around 1,860 giant pandas in the wild, a 17 percent increase from the decade before, according to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). In 2021, Chinese conservationists reclassified the animal from an endangered species to one that is vulnerable.

Source: Al Jazeera and news agencies
listen to these podcasts
podcast episode artwork
play
From: The Take
How the myth of democracy fuels the US forever wars
From Vietnam to Iraq and Afghanistan, US wars left not freedom but ruin. In a recent book, co-authors Noam Chomsky and Nat...
podcast episode artwork
play
From: The Inside Story Podcast
What are the implications of Trump's newest travel ban?
Why does Donald Trump seem to be fixated by foreign nationals? He's barred citizens from a number of countries from enteri...
podcast episode artwork
play
From: The Inside Story Podcast
What does Ukraine's attack on Russian airbases mean for peace talks?
Ukraine carries out large-scale drone strikes on multiple Russian airbases and the operation timed just ahead of crucial p...
Related
China to send two giant pandas to Washington, DC, zoo
Bao Li and Qing Bao to arrive this year under a decade-long breeding and research agreement, zoo says.

Published On 29 May 2024
29 May 2024
Two-year-old female giant panda Qing Bao in her habitat at Dujiangyan Base in Sichuan, China
Panda Meng Meng gives birth to second set of twins at Berlin Zoo
Zoo director says the mother is demonstrating proper ‘bear love’ towards ‘lively’ panda cubs.

Published On 23 Aug 2024
23 Aug 2024
Two new born giant pandas at Berlin Zoo
China Premier Li says Australia ties ‘back on track’ as he embarks on visit
During his four-day visit, Li Qiang is visiting Adelaide, the capital, Canberra, and mining state Western Australia.

Published On 15 Jun 2024
15 Jun 2024
China's Premier Li Qiang Visits Australia
More from News
US Supreme Court grants DOGE access to sensitive Social Security data
A protester holds up a sign with a picture of Donald Trump looming above a Social Security card with the caption "Hands Off"
Sinner beats Djokovic to set up French Open final with Alcaraz
Italy's Jannik Sinner (L) shakes hands with Serbia's Novak Djokovic after winning their men's singles semi-final match on day 13 of the French Open tennis tournament on Court Philippe-Chatrier at the Roland-Garros
Deported man Kilmar Abrego Garcia returned to US to face charges
FILE - This undated photo provided by Murray Osorio PLLC shows Kilmar Abrego Garcia. (Murray Osorio PLLC via AP)
Trump announces second round of US trade talks with China next week
Chinese President Xi Jinping and US President Donald Trump
Most popular
Israel to block arrival of Freedom Flotilla ship, reports say
Climate activist Greta Thunberg boards the Madleen boat before setting sail for Gaza along with activists of the Freedom Flotilla Coalition, departing from the Sicilian port of Catania, Italy, Sunday, June 1, 2025.[Salvatore Cavalli/AP]
What has Musk accused Trump of in relation to the Epstein files?
Elon Musk and Donald Trump attend a campaign event.
Where does Poland’s new president stand on Ukraine?
Polish presidential candidate Karol Nawrocki, backed by the main opposition Law and Justice (PiS) party, gestures during his final rally, ahead of the second round of presidential election, in Biala Podlaska, Poland, May 30, 2025. REUTERS/Kacper Pempel
Updates: Israel hits Gaza with wave of attacks as Eid starts, killing 42
Palestinians walk near the rubble of buildings during the Eid al-Adha holiday
AL JAZEERA PODCASTS
podcast episode artwork
Al Jazeera News Updates
Netanyahu confirms Israel arming Gaza clans, Tesla shares drop

start listening
follow


About
About Us
Code of Ethics
Terms and Conditions
EU/EEA Regulatory Notice
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Cookie Preferences
Sitemap
Work for us
Connect
Contact Us
User Accounts Help
Advertise with us
Stay Connected
Newsletters
Channel Finder
TV Schedule
Podcasts
Submit a Tip
Our Channels
Al Jazeera Arabic
Al Jazeera English
Al Jazeera Investigative Unit
Al Jazeera Mubasher
Al Jazeera Documentary
Al Jazeera Balkans
AJ+
Our Network
Al Jazeera Centre for Studies
Al Jazeera Media Institute
Learn Arabic
Al Jazeera Centre for Public Liberties & Human Rights
Al Jazeera Forum
Al Jazeera Hotel Partners
Follow Al Jazeera English:

Al Jazeera Media Network logo
© 2025 Al Jazeera Media Network
