https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-03-03/safeguard-mechanism-climate-policy-uncertain/104996022

Skip to main content
ABC News
Just In
Australia Votes
For You
Politics
World
More

Search the news, stories & people

Log in

Australia's key climate policy faces an uncertain future
By political reporter Tom Lowrey
Topic:Federal Government

Sun 2 Mar
Sunday 2 March
A close up view of a smoke stack at the Whyalla steelworks, taken at sunset
The nation's highest emitting companies are subject to rules under the 'safeguard mechanism' that require them to cut emissions each year. (ABC News: Justin Hewitson)

In short: 
A number of industry and climate groups are arguing the federal government's 'safeguard mechanism' needs to stay.

Business groups say it provides certainty for the big emitters covered by its rules, while some climate groups want it strengthened further.

What's next?
Opposition Leader Peter Dutton has labelled it a new 'carbon tax', but hasn't said if it will be changed or dumped should the Coalition win office.

Link copied

Share article
Some business and climate groups have voiced their support for keeping one of the federal government's key climate policies in place, with the Coalition yet to commit to its future.

The safeguard mechanism was introduced under the Turnbull government nearly a decade ago, but was significantly strengthened under the Albanese government.

It caps the emissions of the country's heaviest-emitting companies and projects, and successively lowers that limit by roughly 5 per cent each year.

To stick to their caps, companies have to either lower their emissions or buy 'carbon credits'.

It's a key plank of the government's efforts to reach a 43 per cent reduction in emissions by 2030, and net zero by 2050.

The Coalition opposed the changes at the time and has kept up its criticism, but is yet to spell out whether it plans any changes to the scheme should it win government.

In a speech earlier this year, Peter Dutton compared it to the unpopular 'carbon pollution reduction scheme' introduced under the Gillard government — better known as the carbon tax.

"We've seen the safeguard mechanism turned into a new carbon tax — one [that is] three times higher than that implemented by Julia Gillard," he said.

At the time the safeguard mechanism changes were made, they were largely backed by business and industry groups who sought certainty for climate policies affecting their sectors.

Many of those groups argue that while there is room to adjust the scheme, it needs to stay.

Certainty critical
Industry groups rarely clamour for more government regulation, but climate policy was at one point something of an exception.

Groups like the Business Council of Australia complained of "a decade of ad hoc and unstable energy and climate policy" that had left the country on the "back foot" in achieving climate targets.

Others that did push back did so reasonably gently — the Minerals Council of Australia warned the country needed to 'thread the needle' and push down emissions, without pushing projects out of business.

Now that the policy is in place, some are arguing it is worth keeping.

Andrew McKellar from the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry says policy stability is critical for business.

a man wearing glasses standing indoors talking to the media
Andrew McKellar has urged stability with the safeguard mechanism after years of tumult on climate policy. (ABC News: Matt Roberts)

He argues it should stay, but also warns against any plans to strengthen it further.

"From a business point of view, we have been supportive of the safeguard mechanism. It provides a level of structure and certainty," he said.

"We would caution against any move to lower thresholds or expand its perimeter.

"Having the safeguard mechanism in place is an important support to provide certainty for business, and moving the economy in the right direction towards the longer term goal of net zero by 2050."
Energy Producers Australia represents much of Australia's gas industry, including major companies covered by the safeguard mechanism like Woodside, Origin and Shell.

Chief executive Samantha McCulloch isn't calling for the policy to be dumped, but does want to see flexibility — like avoiding overly onerous emissions caps, and the purchase of overseas-based carbon credits.

"The safeguard mechanism must be fit-for-purpose and balance emissions reductions with the need for energy affordability and reliability across the economy," she said.

Woman with blonde hair wearing glasses and a red jacket.
Samantha McCulloch has cautioned against further expansion of the safeguard mechanism. (ABC News: Mark Moore)

"The safeguard mechanism needs to ensure that new and existing gas projects are not subject to excessive, unrealistic reduction targets, well beyond what has been achieved elsewhere, and that Australian LNG remains competitive in international markets.

"The safeguard mechanism should also allow access to robust and verified emissions offsets from around the world to support least cost emissions reductions across the economy."

Coalition concerns
The Coalition hasn't laid out a firm plan on what it would do with the climate policy should it win the next election.

But it has been making a case for some time that change is needed.

Shadow Energy Minister Ted O'Brien addressed the Carbon Market Institute last year, and was asked about the future of the safeguard mechanism.

"My views, and the views of the Coalition were very clear at the time Labor introduced the safeguard mechanism — they hadn't done the work on how it's going to impact companies in that cohort," he said.

"We have seen a lot of that pain come through. A lot of them are very reliant on offsets, on [carbon credits], and we're not seeing a sufficiently active [carbon credit] market.

"We are seeing assets of those companies being written down. I do not believe it is working as the government intended."
A man looks stern as he speaks to the media.
Ted O'Brien has criticised the current operation of the safeguard mechanism. (ABC News: Nick Haggarty)

Peter Dutton was asked about climate policy and the safeguard mechanism at a press conference last month, but didn't directly address his plans for the emissions-capping tool.

"Our policy is that we want renewables in the system and we support renewables, as you saw when we were in government, we put a lot of money into projects and created an environment where significant projects are now a reality," he said.

"But we can't pretend for any longer that the batteries are going to see us through the hours of darkness, or over a week of rain."

Energy Minister Chris Bowen argues the safeguard mechanism is working well, and there is little case for change.

"It's working as intended," he said.

"It's safeguarding the future of Australian industry to ensure that Australian industry can compete in a decarbonising world."

A man wearing a suit looking sideways with his lips pursed
Chris Bowen says the safeguard mechanism is working as intended.   (AAP: Mick Tsikas)

Climate groups call for continuity
Advocates for work on climate change argue that if there is a case for change to the safeguard mechanism, it should be strengthening rather than weakening the tool.

John Connor from the Carbon Markets Institute says given the Coalition is committed to cutting emissions, he can't say why they would want to radically change it.

"It is important to understand that the safeguard mechanism was developed by the Coalition," he said.

"It [now] aligns with what are bipartisan targets of net zero emissions by 2050, and so it's linked to promises and positions that we are pleased to see Peter Dutton and others still continue to support, like net zero."

He argues the reason business groups support certainty when it comes to policies like the safeguard mechanism is they are trying to make long-term investment decisions.

Companies are trying to plan for the emissions reductions they need to make under the mechanism in the years ahead.

"It is very important to understand the declines that they have to deliver compound each year," he said.

"And so it's actually about sending an investment signal.

"These are big emitters, big industrial facilities. And so we need some certainty."
Others say whoever takes office needs to look at expanding the safeguard mechanism to capture more big emitters, and strengthen it to ensure cuts to pollution are actually being made.

Currently the safeguard mechanism captures those emitting more than 100,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide each year, and doesn't capture individual electricity generators (like coal-fired power plants).

Ben McLeod from the Climate Council says there are real opportunities for change.

"The next safeguard mechanism review must be about delivering more genuine, on-site reductions to industrial pollution," he said.

"We need to see stronger rules that make polluters clean up their own mess, rather than paying to delay action. That means shifting away from offsets and requiring real, permanent cuts at the source.

"We also need to bring more polluting facilities into the scheme, including electricity generators, so that all big polluters in Australia play by the same basic rules."

Get a morning news briefing in your inbox
Subscribe to our ABC NewsMail bringing you breaking news from overnight, plus a heads-up on the stories that will shape your day.
Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Email address
Enter your email address
Subscribe
Posted Sun 2 Mar 2025 at 10:53amSunday 2 Mar 2025 at 10:53am

Share
Top Stories
'That's not true': Erin Patterson's week on the witness stand
Topic:Courts

Photo shows A sketch of Erin Patterson wearing a blue jumper and thin framed black glasses with her hair tied back.A sketch of Erin Patterson wearing a blue jumper and thin framed black glasses with her hair tied back. 
Australians could enjoy an upside from US economic policy uncertainty

Analysis by David Taylor

Photo shows Donald Trump reutersDonald Trump reuters
Trump shuns call with Musk and considers selling Tesla
Topic:World Politics

Photo shows Donald Trump and Elon Musk sit in a carDonald Trump and Elon Musk sit in a car
Housing minister declares Australia has made it 'uneconomic' to build homes
Patricia Karvelas portrait
Analysis by Patricia Karvelas

Photo shows Clare O'NeilClare O'Neil
Outpouring of grief as police find remains in search for Pheobe Bishop
Topic:Missing Person

Photo shows A metal fence with framed photographs, flowers and notes in front of itA metal fence with framed photographs, flowers and notes in front of it
Popular now
Trump shuns call with Musk and considers selling Tesla
Topic:World Politics

Photo shows Donald Trump and Elon Musk sit in a carDonald Trump and Elon Musk sit in a car
Tasmanian police find bodies in search for missing Queensland couple
Topic:Missing Person

Photo shows A selfie of Leannedra Kang and Takahiro Toya with a view of Hobart below themA selfie of Leannedra Kang and Takahiro Toya with a view of Hobart below them
Outpouring of grief as police find remains in search for Pheobe Bishop
Topic:Missing Person

Photo shows A metal fence with framed photographs, flowers and notes in front of itA metal fence with framed photographs, flowers and notes in front of it
Related topics
Australia

Climate Change

Emissions Trading

Environmental Policy

Federal Government

Government and Politics

Industry

Top Stories
'That's not true': Erin Patterson's week on the witness stand
Topic:Courts

Photo shows A sketch of Erin Patterson wearing a blue jumper and thin framed black glasses with her hair tied back.A sketch of Erin Patterson wearing a blue jumper and thin framed black glasses with her hair tied back. 
Australians could enjoy an upside from US economic policy uncertainty

Analysis by David Taylor

Trump shuns call with Musk and considers selling Tesla
Topic:World Politics

Housing minister declares Australia has made it 'uneconomic' to build homes
Patricia Karvelas portrait
Analysis by Patricia Karvelas

Outpouring of grief as police find remains in search for Pheobe Bishop
Topic:Missing Person

Just In
Drought devastates farming town desperate for rain relief
Topic:Regional Communities

26m ago
26 minutes ago
'Broken' families tell of anger and disappointment following Hillcrest verdict
Topic:Courts

48m ago
48 minutes ago
From celebrity hideaway to feral goats: What's next for these island resorts?
Topic:Travel and Tourism

53m ago
53 minutes ago
Cattle to wine grapes: Climate change forcing Tasmanian farmers to pivot
Topic:Weather

1h ago
1 hours ago
More Just In
Back to top
Footer
ABC News homepage
More From ABC NEWS
We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.

Sections
ABC NEWS
Just In
Watch Live
Politics
World
Business
Analysis
Sport
Science
Health
Entertainment
Lifestyle
Fact Check
Other
News in language
中文
Berita Bahasa Indonesia
Tok Pisin
Connect with ABC News
Facebook
Instagram
YouTube
Apple News
X (formerly Twitter)
More from ABC News
Contact ABC NEWS
This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.

AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)

Editorial Policies
Accessibility
Help
Contact Us
About the ABC
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
© 2025 ABC
