https://www.vox.com/2014/7/17/5912143/australia-repeals-carbon-tax-global-warming


Skip to main content
The homepage
Explainers
Politics
Culture
Advice
Listen
Watch

Menu
Australia is repealing its controversial carbon tax


AD

archives
Australia is repealing its controversial carbon tax
by Brad Plumer

Jul 17, 2014, 9:10 AM PDT


Cover from the American Geographical Society’s “Around the World Program.” 1961. I
Cover from the American Geographical Society’s “Around the World Program.” 1961. I Tom1231/Flickr
The carbon-tax experiment in Australia is now over.

Economists tend to prefer carbon pricing for tackling global warming 

On Wednesday, the Australian Senate voted 39-32 to repeal the nation’s controversial tax on greenhouse-gas emissions. The tax, first passed in 2011, had charged people roughly $23 for every ton of carbon-dioxide they emitted from oil, coal, or gas.

The repeal is a big blow for climate policy. Economists have long argued that carbon pricing is one of the most effective ways to tackle global warming. The premise is simple: People should pay for the damage they cause by emitting carbon. And making fossil fuels more expensive will spur companies to seek out cleaner alternatives.

But the major weakness of a price on carbon has always been politics. So many daily activities depend on fossil fuels — from driving to home heating to industry — and the pinch from any tax is likely to be more noticeable than, say, that from more complex regulations. And that set up a major battle in Australia, which has one of the highest emissions per person rates in the world.

How Australia’s carbon tax worked — and why it fell
133114867


AD

Former Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

The story goes back to 2011, when Julia Gillard’s Labor Government first passed a

Become a Vox member to continue reading.

AD
Most Popular
The real reasons Musk is feuding with Trump
The Air Quality Index and how to use it, explained
A federal court’s novel proposal to rein in Trump’s power grab
Elon Musk’s favorite drug, explained
The Supreme Court’s rare moment of unanimity against a DEI rule, explained

AD
Today, ExplainedUnderstand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day, compiled by news editor Sean Collins.

Email (required)
Enter your email

Sign Up

AD
More in archives
The Supreme Court will decide if the government can ban transgender health care
The Supreme Court will decide if the government can ban transgender health care
On the Money
On the Money
Total solar eclipse passes over US
Total solar eclipse passes over US
The 2024 Iowa caucuses
The 2024 Iowa caucuses
The Big Squeeze
The Big Squeeze
Abortion medication in America: News and updates
Abortion medication in America: News and updates
Recommended For You
Jun 2
The wild hunt for clean energy minerals

AD


AD

About us
Our staff
Ethics & Guidelines
How we make money
Contact us
How to pitch Vox
Newsletters
Privacy Notice
Terms of Use
Cookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Licensing
Accessibility
Platform Status
Careers
© 2025 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved

