https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2024/nov/25/australia-urged-to-do-more-on-climate-crisis-after-playing-role-in-trillion-dollar-cop29-shortfall


Skip to main contentSkip to navigationSkip to navigation
Support the Guardian
Fund independent journalism with 30% off
Claim discount
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
The Guardian - Back to homeThe Guardian

News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
US
US politics
World
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
Soccer
Business
Environment
Tech
Science
Newsletters
Wellness
Inside the summit
1:39
Developing countries condemn 'insufficient' Cop29 deal – video
Australian foreign policy
 This article is more than 6 months old
Australia urged to do more on climate crisis as activists rue trillion-dollar Cop29 funding gap
This article is more than 6 months old
Wealthy nations agree to take the lead in helping developing countries shift to a low-carbon economy

Follow our Australia news live blog for latest updates
Get our breaking news email, free app or daily news podcast
Adam Morton in Baku
Sun 24 Nov 2024 18.59 EST
Share
The Australian government has been urged to “step up” and do more to address the climate crisis after a major UN summit ended with a global finance agreement that developing countries criticised for not going far enough.

The Cop29 talks in the Azerbaijan capital of Baku ended at 4am on Sunday with a consensus agreement that developing countries would be paid at least US$300bn (A$460bn) a year in global climate finance by 2035 to help them shift to a low-carbon economy and adapt to the impacts of extreme weather.

Deal or no deal: can Labor avoid an ‘end-of-year dumpster fire’ and pass its legislative agenda?
Paul Karp
Paul Karp
Read more
Wealthy nations, including Australia, agreed to “take the lead” in getting there. But they acknowledged developing countries actually needed at least US$1.3tn (A$2tn) a year.

The countries agreed to work together to find a way to achieve the higher target. It could include funding from private investors and potential new taxes on, for example, shipping and aviation.

The $1.3tn was based on a calculation by leading economists but many activists demanded more – as much as US$7tn a year – based on wealthy nations’ historic responsibility for rising damage caused by global heating.

The agreement cleared a final plenary session 34 hours after the scheduled close of the summit but some developing countries responded with fury, calling it not just a failure but a betrayal.

It may not have been accepted had the Azeri Cop29 president, Mukhtar Babayev, not gavelled it through before India could express its objection. India’s delegate, Chandni Raina, said the deal was an “optical illusion” and suggested the country would have blocked it given the chance.

Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email

Australia’s climate change minister, Chris Bowen, was a co-facilitator leading negotiations with nearly 200 countries on the design before making recommendations to the Azeri hosts. Bowen left before the final plenary on a pre-booked flight to return to Australia for parliament on Monday. Australia was represented by diplomats in the final stages.

Erin Ryan, a senior international campaigner at Climate Action Network Australia, said Cop29 had “ended as it ran”, held hostage by the interest of high-income countries and a petrostate host.

She said an annual goal of US$300bn might sound big “but when spread globally for what is required to transition, it leaves us where we started: with low-income countries struggling to shoulder the rising costs of a climate crisis they never caused”.

She added: “As a wealthy nation, and a huge fossil fuel exporter, the Australian government notably failed to drive bigger ambition. This is about realism. Getting better financial arrangements is key to getting global support for rapid fossil-fuel phase-out globally.”

The deal does not commit the Australia government to paying a particular amount. It has been sharply criticised for what Climate Action Tracker called “insufficient” climate finance commitments to date – A$3bn between 2020 and 2025. It was praised for committing A$50m to a loss and damage fund during the summit.

Greenpeace Australia Pacific’s head of advocacy, Susie Byers, said given that Australia was bidding to host a UN climate summit in 2026 with Pacific countries it had both “a responsibility and a strong interest in stepping up”. That meant the government presenting a climate plan early next year that would play the country’s part in aiming to limit global heating, she said.

skip past newsletter promotion
Sign up to Breaking News Australia

Free newsletter
Get the most important news as it breaks

Enter your email address
Sign up
Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
after newsletter promotion
“Australia must also honour the spirit of [last year’s] commitment to transition away from fossil fuels and replace its exports of coal and gas with renewable energy,” she said.

A wall of PO boxes with one coloured red
Jackson sold his ID to an Australian gambling syndicate. He is now discovering what has been done in his name
Read more
Richie Merzian, the chief executive of the Clean Energy Investor Group and a former climate diplomat, said a more ambitious finance deal was warranted but the end result was a “practical outcome” and Bowen deserved credit for his role.

“Now we need to get on with action to build the renewables, implement the transition and turn our complete attention to developing 2035 emission reduction targets due next year,” he said.

The Australian government had hoped to win the rights to host Cop31 in November 2026 during the Baku summit, but a decision under the UN’s consensus process was deferred after the other contender, Turkey, resisted pressure to step aside.

The agreement in Baku sets a deadline for the decision of June 2025, when climate diplomats meet in Bonn, Germany, but it could drag on until Cop30 in Brazil next November.

In a post on Bluesky reflecting on Cop29, Bowen posted a picture of himself talking with the UN secretary-general, António Guterres. He said “tackling climate change is in our national interest and getting climate finance right is vital for our nearest neighbours in the Pacific”.

“This Cop wasn’t easy, but it was important,” he said. “We also welcome the very strong ongoing support for Australia to host Cop31.”

You've read 45 articles this year. Your support helps independent media stand up for the truth. Save 30% off an annual Guardian subscription to enjoy fiercely independent, quality journalism for less.
Article count
on
Why you can rely on the Guardian not to bow to Trump – or anyone
I hope you appreciated this article. Before you move on, I wanted to ask whether you could support the Guardian’s journalism as we face the unprecedented challenges of covering this administration.

As Trump himself observed: “The first term, everybody was fighting me. In this term, everybody wants to be my friend.” 

He’s not entirely wrong. Already, several large corporate-owned news organizations have settled multimillion-dollar lawsuits with the president in order to protect their business interests. Meanwhile, billionaires have intervened editorially in the news outlets they own to limit potentially unfavorable coverage of the president.

The Guardian is different: we have no interest in being Donald Trump’s – or any politician’s – friend. Our allegiance as independent journalists is not to those in power but to the public. Whatever happens in the coming months and years, you can rely on the Guardian never to bow down to power, nor back down from truth.

How are we able to stand firm in the face of intimidation and threats? As journalists say: follow the money. The Guardian has neither a self-interested billionaire owner nor profit-seeking corporate henchmen pressuring us to appease the rich and powerful. We are funded by our readers and owned by the Scott Trust – whose only financial obligation is to preserve our journalistic mission in perpetuity.

What’s more, in a time of rising, democracy-threatening misinformation, we make our fiercely independent journalism free to all, with no paywall – so that everyone in the US can have access to responsible, fact-based news.

With the administration already cracking down on free speech, banning reporters from the Oval Office, and the president and his allies pursuing lawsuits against news outlets whose stories they don’t like, it has never been more urgent, or more perilous, to pursue fair, accurate reporting. Can you support the Guardian today?

We value whatever you can spare, but a recurring contribution makes the most impact, enabling greater investment in our most crucial, fearless journalism. As our thanks to you, we can offer you some great benefits – including seeing far fewer fundraising messages like this. We’ve made it very quick to set up, so we hope you’ll consider it. Thank you.

Betsy Reed

Editor, Guardian US

Betsy Reed


Support $60/year
30% off

Support $150 $105/year
Unlock All-access digital benefits:
Unlimited access to the Guardian app
Unlimited access to our new Feast App
Ad-free reading on all your devices
Exclusive newsletter for supporters, sent every week from the Guardian newsroom
Far fewer asks for support

Support once from just $1
Continue
Remind me in July
Accepted payment methods: Visa, Mastercard, American Express and PayPal
Explore more on these topics
Australian foreign policy
Cop29
Climate crisis
Global climate talks
Chris Bowen
news
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed

Outrage after Republican representative disparages Sikh prayer in the US House

Russia is at war with Britain and US is no longer a reliable ally, UK adviser says

Live
Federal prosecutor reportedly quit over concern Ábrego García indictment was politically motivated – US politics live

US supreme court rules Doge can access social security data during legal challenge

Families of children killed in Hillcrest jumping castle incident ‘shattered’ after not guilty verdict
Related stories



As Cop29 wraps up and the climate crisis gathers pace, Australia’s dash for gas is confounding
24 Nov 2024
115
comments

Australia hoped hosting a Cop climate summit was a done deal. But one nation still stands in the way
20 Nov 2024
112
comments

Paris agreement is working, Australian minister tells Cop29, but much deeper cuts needed by 2035
19 Nov 2024

Cop29 delegates told to ‘cut the theatrics’ and tackle climate crisis
18 Nov 2024

Australia accused of ‘exporting climate destruction’ on tiny Pacific neighbours with massive gas expansion plans
17 Nov 2024

Chris Bowen makes last-minute diplomatic stop in Turkey as Australia ramps up bid to host Cop31
15 Nov 2024

Chris Bowen says agreement on global fossil fuel phase out central to Australia’s renewable energy plans
11 Dec 2023

The two Australias at Cop28: a country at odds with itself on the climate crisis
10 Dec 2023
More from News



Immigration
Kilmar Ábrego García returned from El Salvador to face criminal charges in US
1h ago

Data protection
US supreme court rules Doge can access social security data during legal challenge
44m ago

Congress
Outrage after Republican representative disparages Sikh prayer in the US House
4h ago

Analysis
Money can’t buy him love: Republicans give Elon Musk the cold shoulder amid Trump feud
6h ago

US Capitol attack
Enrique Tarrio and other freed January 6 convicts sue over prosecutions
1h ago

UK
Russia is at war with Britain and US is no longer a reliable ally, former White House adviser says
6h ago

Russia-Ukraine war
‘He’s a bulldog’: the man behind the success of Ukraine’s Operation Spiderweb
12h ago

Sean ‘Diddy‘ Combs
Ex-girlfriend of Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs says she was pressured into sex with escorts
2h ago

California
Yoga classes resume at San Diego beach as court says they are ‘protected speech’
47m ago
Most viewed
USUS politicsWorldClimate crisisMiddle EastUkraineSoccerBusinessEnvironmentTechScienceNewslettersWellness
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
SecureDrop
Work for us
 
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Terms & conditions
Contact us
All topics
All writers
Digital newspaper archive
Tax strategy
Facebook
YouTube
Instagram
LinkedIn
Newsletters
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Tips
Back to top
© 2025 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)