https://www.iigcc.org/insights/what-happened-cop29-in-week-one-summary-investors


Skip to main content
IIGCC__navy_
Our work 
Our members
News 
Resources
Events 
About us 
Join us 
Get in touch
Sign in

Search
Search
Our work 
❮ Main Menu
Our programmes
❮ Main Menu
Corporate
❮ Main Menu
2025 proxy season
Investor strategies
Policy
Investor initiatives
❮ Main Menu
Climate Action 100+
Paris Aligned Asset Owners
Nature Action 100
Net Zero Engagement Initiative
Investor Agenda
Net Zero Asset Managers
Banks Engagement and Research Initiative
Finance Sector Deforestation Action
EMDE Investor Taskforce
Investor working groups
Framework & tools
❮ Main Menu
Net Zero Investment Framework
❮ Main Menu
Governance & Strategy
Objectives
Strategic Asset Allocation
Asset Level Assessment & Targets
❮ Main Menu
Listed Equity & Corporate Fixed Income
Sovereign Bonds
Real Estate
Infrastructure
Private Equity
Private Debt
Policy Advocacy
Stakeholder & Market Engagement
Implementation guidance for objectives and targets
❮ Main Menu
The Portfolio Decarbonisation Reference Objective
Portfolio Decarbonisation Reference Objective for sovereign bonds
Allocation to Climate Solutions Objective
Our members
News 
❮ Main Menu
Insights
Media centre
Resources
Events 
❮ Main Menu
London Climate Action Week 2025
About us 
❮ Main Menu
Our history
Our team
Our board
Working here
Annual Report
Join us 
❮ Main Menu
IIGCC membership
Get in touch
Homepage ❯ News ❯ Insights ❯ What happened at COP29 in week one? A summary for investors
Insights
What happened at COP29 in week one? A summary for investors
What happened at COP29 in week one? A summary for investors
 
Callum Provan
Content Strategist
19.11.24
The Finance and Energy/Peace, Relief and Recovery Days saw a flurry of activity from investors and other non-state actors in Baku, even as uncertainty remained around the New Collective Quantified Goal on climate finance which must be agreed at COP29.

Some 65,000 attendees welcomed an official day of rest on 17 November after a packed first week. Rumours in Baku Stadium centred on the progress of the COP29 Finance text, which Carbon Brief reported has reduced from 33 to 25 pages. Many brackets, however, signal slow progress in overcoming disagreements and a challenging week ahead for negotiators.

Several world leaders did not attend, including US President Biden, French President Macron, and the EU’s Ursula von der Leyen, though other countries did announce new climate plans. The UK, Brazil and the United Arab Emirates shared updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) at the conference, setting a standard for other nations to follow.

“This statement of intent signals UK leadership on climate and offers a valuable opportunity to attract clean energy investments, spur clean growth, and strengthen investor confidence in the country’s climate trajectory.”

The UK plans to cut 81% of greenhouse gas emissions by 2035, relative to 1990 levels, while Brazil pledged to cut emissions 59-67% by the same year, relative to 2005. The United Arab Emirates, host to last year’s COP28, announced its plan to reduce 47% of its emissions by 2035, relative to a notably higher baseline of 2019.

Reacting to the UK announcement, Stephanie Pfeifer, CEO of IIGCC said:

“This statement of intent signals UK leadership on climate and offers a valuable opportunity to attract clean energy investments, spur clean growth, and strengthen investor confidence in the country’s climate trajectory.”

An unavoidable investment case

In the ‘real economy COP’, our delegation was on the ground to discuss how best to increase investment in emerging markets, the need for more investable NDCs including National Adaptation Plans, and the challenges of decarbonising the built environment.

This included co-hosting an event with the Atlantic Council, which convened financial institutions and climate finance negotiators in an informal discussion, sharing mutual needs to inform the negotiations. Moderated by Valentina Ramirez, IIGCC Head of Climate Strategy Implementation, investors emphasised the need for industrial policies that incentivise investments in climate solutions, encouraging negotiators to complement their approach to the NCQG to foster stronger engagement with private finance actors.

"“I can tell you how to talk to the trees, talk to the water. You can connect with Indigenous communities…Businesses have to invest in people.”

On day two, we co-hosted a panel with the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action to strengthen impactful collaboration between public and private actors to deliver climate finance at scale, particularly in developing countries. The event was convened by the COP29 Presidency with an opening keynote from Nigar Arpadarai, the Azerbaijani Climate Change High-level Champion.

Arianna Griffa, IIGCC Senior Policy Manager, moderated a panel with Rowan Douglas, CEO of Climate Risk and Resilience at Howden; Raquel Moses, CEO of the Caribbean Climate Smart Accelerator; and Juan Carlos Jintiach, Executive Secretary of the Global Alliance of Territorial Communities.

Juan Carlos, a member of the Shuar Indigenous group in the Amazon Rainforest of Ecuador who was shortlisted for the Nobel Peace Prize, explained to the audience:

“I can tell you how to talk to the trees, talk to the water. You can connect with Indigenous communities…Businesses have to invest in people.”

Attracting investment

On Friday, we co-hosted an official side event as a founding partner of the Investor Agenda, featuring discussions with IIGCC members, other international investors and government officials. The event began with a reminder that 650 investors, representing more than USD33 trillion in assets under management, signed their support for the 2024 Global Investor Statement on the Climate Crisis.

Matias Cardomingo, General Coordinator for Social and Environmental Impact Analysis for the Ministry of Finance in Brazil, delivered the opening remarks. He outlined the country’s new climate and ecological transformation investment platform, named BIP, which, alongside a suite of supportive green policies, can help to attract investments for the transition.

This was followed by a panel discussion on policy action to unlock investments for a net zero and resilient economy, moderated by Arianna Griffa.

The panel featured insights from Erich Cripton, Director of Business Relations at the Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec (CDPQ); Natalie Sinha, Head of Sustainability, Infrastructure Investing at UBS; and Hidehiko Sogano, Director and Managing Executive Officer at Dai-ichi Life Holdings in Japan. Discussions reiterated the need for clear sectoral pathways to support hard-to-abate sectors, underscored by an appetite from private finance to do more.

We shared new climate solutions guidance for renewable energy infrastructure, which aims to support the COP28 target of tripling renewable energy capacity by 2030.

A second panel explored how investor action is accelerating the transition to the net zero economy. It was moderated by Nicolette Bartlett, Chief Impact Officer at CDP with panellists Jan Kæraa Rasmussen, Head of ESG and Sustainability at PensionDanmark; Peter van der Werf, Head of Active Ownership and Executive Director at Robeco; and Nana Li, Head of Sustainability and Stewardship, Asia Pacific at Impax Investment Management.

Peter shared Robeco’s “traffic light system” to assess company and country sustainability maturity and referenced our paper, making NDCs investable, while Nana Li shared new research from Impax IM which supports investment in developing markets.

Taking action

Elsewhere, Valentina spoke on a panel focused on de-risking private climate finance, hosted by the Danish Industry, and a panel on the increasing role of pull finance to de-risk investments in emerging markets, hosted by KPMG in the Canada Pavilion.

Valentina also moderated a panel on driving innovative approaches to incentivise climate resilience investment, before joining a panel to discuss real economy standards to deliver an equitable net zero future, outlining lessons from the Net Zero Investment Framework.

Hugh Garnett, Senior Programme Manager, Real Assets, spoke in an official UNFCCC implementation lab focused on how best to enhance ambition for energy policy. He shared our new climate solutions guidance for renewable energy infrastructure, which aims to support the COP28 target of tripling renewable energy capacity by 2030.

This came alongside a panel where Hugh discussed investing in innovative solutions to decarbonise the built environment, highlighting the challenge of measuring energy efficiency.

Overall, despite the uncertainty around headline negotiations across finance, mitigation and adaptation, one thing is clear: investors made their voices heard and are taking action. Now, all eyes are on the final week of negotiations.

If you’d like to take part in our working groups and help shape the outputs of our resources, get in touch today to learn more about becoming a part of IIGCC. 

 
Related articles
COP29: Outstanding questions, progress made and opportu...
COP29 event guide including Finance Day
Asset TV countdown to COP29: Climate action and investm...
 
Related tags
COPs COP29
Next article
From COP29 to Mansion House, has the UK reclaimed climate leadership?
IIGCC-Logo
IIGCC
77 Kingsway
London
WC2B 6SR

Follow us
 
Subscribe
Stay up to date with our latest news & updates
Subscribe
All meetings, communications and initiatives undertaken by IIGCC are designed solely to support investors in understanding risks and opportunities associated with climate change and take action to address them. Our work is conducted in accordance with all the relevant laws, including data protection, competition laws and acting in concert rules. It is a foundational principle of how IIGCC and its members work together that the choice to adopt guidance, best practice tools or tactics prepared by IIGCC or to make commitments in line with any initiative co-sponsored by IIGCC is always at the ultimate discretion of individual members based on their own decision making. IIGCC does not require or seek collective decision-making or action with respect to acquiring, holding, disposing and/or voting of securities. Members are independent fiduciaries responsible for their own investment and voting decisions and must always act completely independently to set their own strategies, policies and practices based on their own best interests. In the conduct of our work we maintain safeguards around information sharing, we do not encourage or participate in collective boycotts, and we ensure that members make their own unilateral decisions.  IIGCC’s services to members do not include financial, legal or investment advice.

© 2025 Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change Ltd. All Rights Reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookie Policy | Terms of Use | Company Registration No: 7921860

